Representation learning and transfer learning (#63)
jaybee84/ml-in-rd: content/03.prior-knowledge.representation-and-transfer.md

Supervised neural networks used in medical imaging studies [@doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.07.014] (reviewed in [@doi:10.1016/j.zemedi.2018.11.002] and [@doi:10.1098/rsif.2017.0387]), which are trained to predict labels or classes, are also an example of representation learning.

Whether or not a learned representation or set of features is _useful_ depends on the task at hand.
In a supervised setting, it may be sufficient for a feature to distinguish between classes, but if we hope to use a feature for biological discovery, we may prioritize intepretability.
For example, learned features in the medical imaging domain may be a series of edges that constitute a blood vessel formation that discriminates between disease states or the learned features may not align with characteristics recognized as important by domain experts at all.
From transcriptomics data, learned features could be coordinated sets of genes involved in a biological process that are descriptive in some way [@doi:10.1038/s41467-020-14666-6], but do not necessarily distinguish cases from controls in our study.

> In the rare disease domain, Dincer et al. leveraged publicly available acute myeloid leukemia (AML) gene expression data to improve the prediction of _in vitro_ drug responses [@doi:10.1101/278739]. 

Reviewer: Really interesting, I never considered AML to be a rare disease, but I also didn't know what the incidence rate was. 1:25k is pretty rare!

Author: I generally use the Orphan Drug Act definition (any condition affecting fewer than 200,000 people in the US), which suggests to me that we should probably state that definition in the introduction + explicitly talk about how not everything we'll touch on will be applicable to every rare disease.

Reviewer: Yeah, I use that definition too - in this case, it was more about ignorance on my end w/r/t AML incidence. Agree that we should use the ODA definition and add this to the manuscript!

The authors trained a variational autoencoder (VAE) on AML data that had been collected over time without the phenotypic information they were interested in–in this case, drug response. 
A VAE is an unsupervised neural network that learns a series of representations or encodings from data, where each learned attribute will have a probability distribution associated with it rather than a single value.
The authors used the learned attributes to encode a low-dimensional representation of held-out AML data with phenotype labels of interest, and used this low-dimensional representation as input to a classifier that predicted _in vitro_ drug response.

Representation learning tends to be data-intensive–many samples are required.
Though there were over 6500 publicly available AML samples from many different studies used as part of the training set in Dincer et al. [@doi:10.1101/278739], we expect that in other rare diseases considerably fewer samples will be available for training or, in the case of systemic diseases, studies may be from different tissues.

> The study by Dincer and colleagues highlights another challenge: even if enough samples have been collected over time to support representation learning, these samples may not be associated with the deep phenotypic information that would maximize their scientific value.

Reviewer: this might be a good takeaway for outlook section - comprehensive phenotypic-genotypic databases or machine learning methods that integrate genomic and EHR data might be important next steps

To assess suitability, we must find ways to examine the relevance of learned features (latent variables) to the rare disease gene expression data.
In Taroni et al., we found that the expression of latent variables that could be matched between the MultiPLIER model and a model trained on a rare disease dataset alone were well-correlated, particularly in the case of latent variables that were biologically relevant (i.e., significantly associated with input gene sets) [@doi:10.1016/j.cels.2019.04.003].
Despite the absence of AAV from the training set, MultiPLIER was able to learn a latent variable where the genes with the highest contributions encode antigens that the antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) form against in AAV and with higher expression in a group of samples from patients with AAV that were reported to have more severe disease [@doi:10.1002/art.27398].
The utility of this approach stems from the fact that biological processes are often _shared_ between conditions–the same ANCA antigen genes are components of normal neutrophilic granule development that is likely captured or assayed in the collection of transcriptomic data used for training.

> MultiPLIER has additional attributes that make it practical for studying rare diseases: not all latent variables learned by a PLIER model are associated with input gene sets, and therefore may capture technical noise separately from biological signal, and we can use a single model to describe datasets from multiple tissues or cohorts that are not obviously directly comparable instead of attempting to reconcile results from multiple models (see _05.heterogeneity.md_).

Author: Note to self: There is probably some set of Manubot instructions for linking to another section that should be used to link to `05.heterogeneity.md` here.

Reviewer 2: There is an example here: https://github.com/BIRSBiointegration/whitePaper/blob/master/content/45.interp-challenges.md

See `implicit_header_references ` on https://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html

> MultiPLIER has additional attributes that make it practical for studying rare diseases: not all latent variables learned by a PLIER model are associated with input gene sets, and therefore may capture technical noise separately from biological signal, and we can use a single model to describe datasets from multiple tissues or cohorts that are not obviously directly comparable instead of attempting to reconcile results from multiple models (see _05.heterogeneity.md_).

Author: Note to reviewers: Oh boy, there sure is a lot of information about MultiPLIER here. Although I do think there are multiple lessons to be learned from that paper, some of this may be better suited for #82.

> MultiPLIER has additional attributes that make it practical for studying rare diseases: not all latent variables learned by a PLIER model are associated with input gene sets, and therefore may capture technical noise separately from biological signal, and we can use a single model to describe datasets from multiple tissues or cohorts that are not obviously directly comparable instead of attempting to reconcile results from multiple models (see _05.heterogeneity.md_).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
MultiPLIER has additional attributes that make it practical for studying rare diseases: not all latent variables learned by a PLIER model are associated with input gene sets, and therefore may capture technical noise separately from biological signal, and we can use a single model to describe datasets from multiple tissues or cohorts that are not obviously directly comparable instead of attempting to reconcile results from multiple models (see [Techniques to manage disparities in data generation are required to power robust analyses in rare diseases]).
```
This should do it, but it may be ugly 😂
